# An Interactive Simulation

This example shows how to set up and run an interactive aircraft simulation. You will be able to
control it through the built-in GUI and, optionally, use the free X-Plane 12 demo for 3D
visualization.

!!! warning "Configuring Julia for Multithreading"

    When running an interactive simulation, ```Flight.jl``` uses multithreading to concurrently handle
    the simulation loop, the built-in GUI and any attached I/O devices. Therefore, to work through this
    example you will need to start Julia with multiple threads enabled. You can find out how to do this in
    the [manual](https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/manual/multi-threading/). However, if you are using the
    Julia extension for VS Code, the easiest way is to add the following entry to your
    ```settings.json``` (```auto``` will work well for most modern CPUs):

    ```json
    "julia.additionalArgs": [
        "--threads=auto",
    ],
    ```

### Configuring X-Plane 12

Download, install and run the [X-Plane 12 demo](https://www.x-plane.com/desktop/try-it/). Of course,
if you happen to have the full version, you can run that instead. Since we are only using X-Plane as
an external visualization tool, we only need to set up a couple of things; for further help, check
out the [X-Plane 12 manual](https://www.x-plane.com/manuals/desktop/).

!!! note

    If you can't run X-Plane 12 (which may happen for instance if you have an Intel integrated graphics
    chip), you can skip this section. Your visuals will be limited to the built-in GUI, but everything
    else in this example should still work fine.

From the main menu, click on *New Flight*. Select the Cessna Skyhawk as your aircraft and Salzburg
(LOWS) as your initial location. Start the flight.

![X-Plane 12 New Flight Screen](xp12_new_flight.png)

!!! note

    The X-Plane 12 demo is time-limited to 15 minutes. After that, an on-screen pop-up will appear. If
    you want it gone, you can restart X-Plane and click on *Resume Last Flight*. You will then need to
    abort the Julia simulation and run it again (we will see how to do this shortly).

To switch to an external camera, press Shift+4. You can right click and drag to rotate the view and
use the mouse wheel to zoom in and out. To return to the cockpit camera, press Shift+0. Moving the
mouse to the top of the screen brings up the menu bar.

![X-Plane 12 Settings Icon](xp12_settings_icon.png)

On the menu bar, click on the *Settings* icon and go the *Network* tab. Make sure *Accept incoming
connections* is enabled. Then, under the *UDP Ports* section, check the *Port we receive on
(legacy)* value. The default is 49000, but you can use a different one if you need to. Finally, if
you are running X-Plane on a different machine than your Julia session, note its IP address.

![X-Plane 12 Network Settings](xp12_network_settings.png)

Now go to the *Graphics* tab. Unless you have a multi-monitor setup, you will probably want to run
X-Plane in windowed mode. This will allow you to keep it on screen along with the ```Flight.jl```
built-in GUI. To enable windowed mode, select *Windowed Simulator* in the *Monitor usage* drop-down.

![X-Plane 12 Graphics Settings](xp12_graphics_settings.png)

You might also want to experiment with the quality settings until you achieve a comfortable
framerate. To display the framerate on screen, go to the *Data Output* tab, find the *Framerate*
entry in the table and enable the *Show in cockpit* option.

![X-Plane 12 Data Output](xp12_data_output.png)

We are done configuring X-Plane, now let's set up our simulation in Julia.


### Setting Up the Simulation

Let's begin by initializing the package.
```@repl
using Flight
```

Create aircraft. SystemDescriptor. We are not into the details in this example. Explain what
Cessna172Xv1 is

Create terrain. Explain why that terrain height. Our simulation's terrain model is independent of
X-Plane's terrain mesh,


Explain what XPlane12Output does.



The ```FlightCore.Joysticks``` module provides a joystick interface layer via [SDL2_jll]
(https://github.com/JuliaBinaryWrappers/SDL2_jll.jl). Currently, Thrustmaster's T.16000M is the only
supported model. Adding support for other joysticks is relatively straightforward, but we are not be
getting into that in this example. If you happen to have a T.16000M available, you can plug it in
now and do the following:

Otherwise, don't worry. For this example, the SAS and autopilot modes will do most of the flying for
us, so you can easily control the aircraft through the GUI.

!!! note "X-Plane UDP Settings"

    By default, the ```XPlane12Output``` constructor assumes X-Plane 12 is running on your local machine
    and listening on port 49000. If this is not the case, you should provide the appropriate IP address
    and port via keyword arguments. For example:

    ```@repl
    using Flight
    using Sockets #bring IPv4 into scope
    xp = XPlane12Output(address = IPv4("192.168.1.2"), port = 49001)
    ```


A hypothetical modification of the Cessna 172S variant

<!-- Along the way, we will briefly introduce/touch upon some key concepts in the Flight.jl package. -->
