### Power and SFC Computation for Lycoming IO 360

References:
Lycoming IO-360 Operator's Manual, Figures 3-21 & 3-5
Internal Combustion Engine Fundamentals (Second Edition)
Kevin Horton's Spreadsheets: https://vansairforce.net/community/showthread.php?t=61330

## ISA Relations

The ISA model relates ambient pressure and temperature at a given geopotential altitude $h$ with their corresponding values at sea level, $p_{sl}$ and $T_{sl}$:
$$\dfrac{T}{T_{sl}} = 1 + \dfrac{\beta}{T_{sl}} h$$
$$\dfrac{p}{p_{sl}} = \left( 1 + \dfrac{\beta}{T_{sl}} h\right)^{-\dfrac{g_{sl}}{\beta R}} = \left(\dfrac{T}{T_{sl}} \right)^{-\dfrac{g_{sl}}{\beta R}}$$

For the first ISA layer ($h<11000 m$), when the sea level conditions are ISA standard conditions:
$$p = p_{std}\left( 1 + \dfrac{\beta}{T_{std}} h\right)^{-\dfrac{g_{sl}}{\beta R}}$$
$$T = T_{std}\left( \dfrac{p}{p_{std}} \right)^{-\dfrac{\beta R}{g_{sl}}}$$

From these we can define the following functions:
$$p_{ISA}(h) := p_{std}\left( 1 + \dfrac{\beta}{T_{std}} h\right)^{-\dfrac{g_{sl}}{\beta R}}$$
$$T_{ISA}(p) = T_{std}\left( \dfrac{p}{p_{std}} \right)^{-\dfrac{\beta R}{g_{sl}}}$$

The first one gives the static ambient pressure one would encounter at an altitude $h$ if the sea level conditions were standard ISA conditions. This function can be used to compute the static pressure $p$ corresponding to the pressure altitudes used by Figure 3-21.

The second one gives the temperature one would encounter at an altitude at which the static pressure is $p$ if the sea level conditions were standard conditions.

## Power at ISA Temperature

Figure 3-21 shows that in general engine power is a function of engine RPM (n), manifold air pressure (MAP), ambient pressure and ambient temperature:

$$P = P(n, MAP, p, T)$$

We can define:
$$\tilde{P} := P(n, MAP, p, T_{ISA}(p)) = \tilde{P}(n,MAP,p)$$

This eliminates the dependence of engine power on temperature by constraining $T$ to a corresponding $p$ through the function $T_{ISA}(p)$. The engine power values plotted in Figure 3-21 belong to this specific $T = T_{ISA}(p)$ subdomain. Therefore, any power value we calculate from Figure 3-21 will be $\tilde{P}(n,MAP,p)=P(n,MAP,p,T_{ISA}(p))$.

To obtain the actual power for an arbitrary temperature $P(n,MAP,p,T)$, we need to relate it to the $\tilde{P}(n,MAP,p)$ computed from Figure 3-21. Fortunately, this relation is straightforward and it is given by Figure 3-21 as:
$$P(n,MAP,p,T) = P\left(n,MAP,p,T_{ISA}(p)\right) \sqrt{\dfrac{T_{ISA}(p)}{T}} = \tilde{P}(n,MAP,p)\sqrt{\dfrac{T_{ISA}(p)}{T}}$$

A justification is given in *Internal Combustion Engine Fundamentals*, Section 2.12. Engine power can be expressed as:
$$P = \eta_{f,b} Q_{HV} \chi_{f} \dot{m}_a$$

Where $\eta_{f,b}$ is the brake fuel conversion efficiency, $Q_{HV}$ is the fuel's heating value, $\chi_f$ is the fuel/air ratio and $\dot{m}_a$ is the air mass flow rate entering the engine.

At wide-open throttle, the flow through the inlet duct can be modeled as an isentropic flow. The mass flow ratio is:
$$\dot{m}_a =
A_e \dfrac{p}{\sqrt{RT}}\sqrt{\dfrac{2\gamma}{\gamma -1} \left[ \left(\dfrac{p}{p_s}\right)^{-2/\gamma} - \left(\dfrac{p}{p_s}\right)^{-(\gamma+1)/\gamma}\right]}
$$

Where $p$ and $T$ are the total (stagnation) pressure and temperature in the duct (respectively equal to the ambient static pressure and temperature), $p_s$ is the static pressure measured at some section inside the duct, and $A_e$ is an equivalent area corresponding to that section.

More generally, the mass flow ratio satisfies:
$$\dot{m}_a \propto \dfrac{p}{\sqrt{T}}$$

Since the only term in $P = \eta_{f,b} Q_{HV} \chi_{f} \dot{m}_a$ that depends significantly on $T$ is $\dot{m}_a$, we can write:
$$P \propto \dfrac{p}{\sqrt{T}}$$

From this:
$$\dfrac{P(n,MAP,p,T)}{P(n,MAP,p,T_{ISA}(p))} = \dfrac{P(n,MAP,p,T)}{\tilde{P}(n,MAP,p)} = \sqrt{\dfrac{T_{ISA}(p)}{T}}$$

## Computing $\tilde{P}$

Returning to $\tilde{P}$ we have:
$$\tilde{P} = \tilde{P}(n, MAP, p)$$

At standard sea level pressure, for an arbitrary throttle setting, we have:
$$\tilde{P}_{std} = \tilde{P}(n, MAP, p_{std}) = \tilde{P}_{std}(n, MAP)$$

This function is shown on Figure 3-21 (Left), with $MAP$ on the x axis and $P$ on the y axis, for different values of $n$.

From Figure 3-21 (Right) we can see that, for a given engine speed $n$, the MAP at wide-open throttle is fully determined by altitude $h$. Or equivalently, by the pressure $p$ related to $h$ through $p_{ISA}(h)$. Let:
$$MAP_{wot} = MAP_{wot}(n, p)$$

This relation between wide-open throttle $MAP$ and $p$ is one-to-one. Therefore, it can be inverted to yield the following function:
$$p_{wot} = p_{wot}(n, MAP)$$

Thus, for each $n$ there is a pressure value $p_{wot}$ for which a given $MAP$ value is the wide-open throttle $MAP$, which we denoted $MAP_{wot}$.

We can also define:
$$\tilde{P}_{wot}(n, MAP) := \tilde{P}(n, MAP, p_{wot}(n, MAP))$$

This is the power output of the engine at a given $n$ and $MAP$ when it is operated at wide-open throttle, that is, when that $MAP$ is the wide-open throttle $MAP$. This occurs at an ambient pressure given by $p_{wot}$.

Both $p_{wot}(n, MAP)$ and $\tilde{P}_{wot}(n, p)$ are provided by Figure 3-21 (Right).

Our goal is to compute $\tilde{P}(n, MAP, p)$ for the general case. For this, we can write:
$$\tilde{P}(n, MAP, p) \approx \tilde{P}(n, MAP, p_{std}) + \left.\dfrac{\partial \tilde{P}}{\partial p}\right|_{n,MAP,p_{std}}(p - p_{std})$$

The first term is directly available from Figure 3-21 (Left).

For the second term, we can estimate the derivative at $p_{std}$ as:
$$\left.\dfrac{\partial \tilde{P}}{\partial p}\right|_{n,MAP,p_{std}}\approx \frac{\tilde{P}_{ref}(n,MAP) - \tilde{P}(n,MAP,p_{std})}{p_{ref} - p_{std}}$$

Where $p_{ref}$ denotes some arbitrary pressure and $\tilde{P}_{ref}(n,MAP)$ is the corresponding power output.

We can choose $p_{ref} = p_{wot}(n, MAP)$, that is, a pressure such that $MAP$ is the wide-open throttle $MAP$. In that case, the power output $\tilde{P}_{ref}(n,MAP)$ must be:

$$\tilde{P}_{ref}(n,MAP) = \tilde{P}(n, MAP, p_{wot}(n, MAP)) = \tilde{P}_{wot}(n,MAP)$$

Both $p_{wot}$ and $\tilde{P}_{wot}$ can be obtained from Figure 3-21 (Right).

## Throttle to MAP

Our input to the engine is not a $MAP$ value, but a throttle setting $thr$. What should the relation between the engine throttle input and the actual $MAP$ be in each operating condition? For each $(n, p)$ combination, the right graph gives us $MAP_{wot}$. Then we simply compute:

$$MAP(thr, p, n) = MAP_{wot} \left(k + thr (1 - k)\right)$$

Where $k$ is a suitably chosen idle $MAP_{idle}/MAP_{wot}$ ratio, for example 0.4$.

With this relation, engine power becomes a function of the form:
$$P = P(n, MAP, T, p) = P(thr, n, p, T)$$

## Continuous Operation Limits

Both graphs in Fig. 3-21 show a line labelled "limiting manifold pressure for continuous operation". From looking at both graphs, it is apparent that this line actually enforces a maximum power for each $n$. That is, it defines a function $\tilde{P}_{lim}(n)$

So far we have ignored this limit when computing $\tilde{P}$, so we may obtain values $\tilde{P} > \tilde{P}_{lim}(n)$. In principle, this power limitation is not enforced by the engine itself; they are under the pilot's responsibility. Therefore, we can choose to ignore them when modeling the engine. But we can also easily simulate the observation of these limits by setting $\tilde{P} = min\{\tilde{P}, \tilde{P}_{lim}(n)\}$.

## Computing $P$

Finally, we recover $P$ from $\tilde{P}$ with:
$$P(n,MAP,p,T) = \tilde{P}(n,MAP,p) \sqrt{\dfrac{T_{ISA}(p)}{T}}$$

Where:

$$T_{ISA}(p) = T_{std}\left( \dfrac{p}{p_{std}} \right)^{-\dfrac{\beta R}{g_{sl}}}$$

## Effect of Mixture

Figure 3-21 assumes maximum power mixture ($mix = 1$). We can use the ratios in figure 3-1 to scale down the power output for $mix \in [0,1]$.

## Fuel consumption

Figure 3-5 provides fuel consumption as:
$$\dot{m} = \dot{m}(n,P,mix)$$

Where $P$ is the actual engine power output. This could be


To model any fuel injected piston engine in the Lycoming lineup, for example IO-540, non-dimensionalize:
- Power values in Figure 3-21 with rated power
- Fuel consumption in figure 3-5 with fuel consumption at rated power with maximum power mixture.
